---
authors: ["Bambang Purnomosidi D. P."]
title: "How to Handle Unstable Debian-based APT Broken Package(s)"
date: 2023-06-22T05:46:23+07:00
draft: false
categories: ['Operating System']
tags: ['Devuan', 'Debian-based', 'Broken', 'APT']
---

If you are a user of [https://debian.org](Debian)-based Linux distro, especially the unstable release (so called **Sid** in Debian), broken packages are not special. They may arise in your day-to-day activities with the distro (that's the reason of why the word **unstable** is used!). While the reason to use the unsable release is obvious: to live in the bleeding edge of software release (including the packages), one still feel surprise of the broken packages event. That is also happen to me, I use [https://devuan.org](Devuan) Linux for my daily activities. Devuan is Debian withoud systemd. I have my own reason to not using systemd - I might reveal that later. As a person who loves to stay in the bleeding edge of software release, I use **ceres** - a sid release of Devuan.

My problem started yesterday, when I recklessly did `sudo apt full-upgrade` after `sudo apt update` and said Yes. The result is broken XOrg X Window System since **xserver-xorg** package and all dependencies were removed. I tried to cure the situation by `sudo apt install xserver-xorg` but it will install **keyboard-configuration** and keyboard-configuration package needs xkb-data version **<= 2.35.1** while I have **2.32-2** (version for ceres). 

To handle this situation, I need to downgrade the package from **2.32-2** to **2.35.1**. I use `sudo apt install xkb-data=2.35.1` but it didn't work. So, what I did is just grab the package from [https://pkginfo.devuan.org/cgi-bin/policy-query.html](Devuan package information) and then installed it using dpkg:

```bash
$ sudo dpkg -i xkb-data_2.35.1-1_all.deb
```

After that, I installed xserver-xorg using `sudo apt install xserver-xorg`, and everything back to normal.
